This is Little Island. It's not an
island exactly, but 132 concrete tulips
that create a 1.5 football pitch-sized
park in the Hudson River on the west
side of Manhattan. I've been wanting to
visit it since it opened in 2021, and I
finally got the chance to go a couple
months ago. I'm glad I went. It's
really, really cool. Let me show you
around. There are two paths onto the
island, and perhaps the most dramatic
one is this one where you go right
underneath some of the tulip structures.
Once you're inside, there's a whole
little world to explore, and the entire
design seems to invite you to do just
that. Serpentine paths wind their way up
and down the very topography created by
the tulips, and you're always surrounded
by lush native plants native to New
York, not the concrete tulips. In
addition to these winding paths, there
are these staircases nestled into the
landscape that create little shortcuts
up toward the top corner of the island.
It's kind of like the board game
Candyland and the stairs of the Rainbow
Trail and Gumdrop Pass. Perhaps even
more charming than the stairs are the
little rocky trails that let you
scramble up and down from one part of
the path to the other. It almost looks
like you aren't allowed to do it, but in
fact, you are. It's the kind of place
kids would have fun climbing on. Most of
the paths on the western side of the
island lead to a vista point at one
corner of the park. The views of lower
Manhattan from the Hudson River are
excellent, and it was definitely a
popular spot for selfies and group
photos. You can also get a nice view of
New Jersey. Well, I guess I wouldn't
call that view nice, but you know, you
get it. The winding path also connects
to a large amphitheater complete with
687 seats and another view of the Hudson
River. There are more paths to the
northern corner with somewhat less
interesting views than the previous
corner, but still a fun walk
nonetheless. The center of Little Island
is the main lawn. There's a plaza space
with food kiosks and shade. It's a
pretty nice vibe overall. Finally,
you're allowed to hike up and over the
arched entrance to the park via an
extremely windy path. Steps down lead
you to a little glade and another stage
for smaller events. Right off the stage
is a set of bathrooms. I'm definitely
not a bathroom selfie kind of person,
but I brought the camera in to show you
how nice the bathrooms are. Not your
typical US park bathrooms. The park and
its bathrooms are impeccably pristine
due to the nonprofit that operates the
park, the concession company that runs
the food kiosks, and the $120 million
set aside for ongoing maintenance. That
money came from the billionaire media
mogul Barry Diller and his wife, the
fashion designer Diane Fon Ferenberg.
They also ponyied up most of the $260
million it took to build Little Island
in the first place. The landscape design
of Little Island is fascinating, but so
too is the story of how Little Island
got built. It's not as simple as a
billionaire dropping a ton of money to
make it happen. Little Island story
includes the Titanic, yes, the Titanic,
the nearby Highline, the Vessel,
environmental lawsuits, and another
rival billionaire. At one point in the
process, it all got so messed up that
Barry Diller pulled his funding and the
project was left for dead. The Little
Island story is as winding as the paths,
and it can teach us something about how
parks and public amenities get built in
the 21st century. Let's get into it
after the bike bell.
[bell]
I could start this story right at the
billionaires fighting, but this is a
city beautiful video. So, we're going to
learn more about the history before we
get into the modern stuff. And you can't
tell the whole story of Little Island
without going back to the early days of
New York. Back in the 1800s, the
shoreline of Manhattan bristled with
peers and warves, places where ships
could unload and load goods bound for
destinations around the world. The Eerie
Canal, completed in 1825, meant that New
York could also move goods by water up
into New York State, as far as Buffalo,
and on into the Great Lakes. It's
estimated that 40 to 70% of all US trade
was handled by the Port of New York in
the second half of the 19th century. New
York's economy continued to grow into
the 20th century, and in 1910, its port
was the busiest in the world. During the
World Wars, the port served as shipyards
that helped build military ships, and
the number of peers in the East River
peaked around 1950. But logistics went
through a revolution starting in the
1950s. The interstate highway system
made long haul trucking popular and
interotal depots were needed to move
goods from ships to trucks. While
Manhattan built new highways around this
time, like FDR Drive and the Westside
Highway, they weren't really useful for
trucking. The old peers weren't set up
for that kind of movement either. These
intermodal depots needed to move
containers, made possible through the
revolution of containerization. Goods
were no longer moved off a ship
individually, but instead inside of
large modular containers. This
innovation drastically sped up the
loading and unloading of ships and cut
the long shoreman workforce. Most of the
shipping in the New York area moved over
to New Jersey and by the 1980s,
Manhattan's peers were out of a job.
Okay, so what about our little specific
area of Manhattan? This area right here
around 14th Street. The space that
Little Island now occupies used to have
a pier there, Pier 54. Pier 54 was part
of a larger group called Chelsea Piers.
Named that because they line the Hudson
River along the Manhattan neighborhood
called Chelsea. Today, Piers 59, 60, and
61 are what modern New Yorkers refer to
as Chelsea Piers, and known for having
all sorts of sports and recreation
venues like a driving range, ice rinks,
and a bowling alley. But all of those
peers, including Pier 54, really had
their heyday from about 1910 through
1932. That's when the White Star and
Kunard lines used the peers as terminals
for their ocean liners. They were large
indoor spaces where passengers could
wait shelter from the elements before
embarking on their trips. Pier 59 was
the intended destination for the
Titanic, which obviously did not make it
there. The Carpathia, the ship that
rescued the passengers from the
Titanic's lifeboats, docked at Pier 54.
This is an image of the reporters
waiting to interview the rescue
passengers as they arrived in New York.
Seems a little insensitive considering
that most of them lost family members,
but okay. The RMS Lucatania departed
from Pier 54 in 1915 and was sunk by
German Ubot during World War I. The
event galvanized support for the US
entering the war, which it eventually
did in 1917. The golden age of the
oceangoing ship at Chelsea Piers
suffered a blow in 1932 when Pier 54
caught fire. Despite the efforts of 700
firefighters and six fireboats, the pier
could not be saved. It could be rebuilt,
though, and Kunard actually rebuilt it
to look essentially identical to the
first pier and carried on from there.
Eventually though, Kunard moved its
terminal north of the island, and Pier
54 fell into disrepair. The terminal
building on the pier was demolished,
leaving an unused pier. The only remnant
of this era is the arch that still
stands on the shore next to Little
Island. Pier 54 stayed that way until
the 1980s when it became a location for
events and concerts. Chelsea, at the
time, as it still is today, is a haven
for the queer community in New York, and
Pier 54 served as a venue for pride
events for 25 years. We're now at the
point where we can see the changes to
the area through Google Earth imagery.
Here is Pier 54 and Pier 55 in 1997. By
2001, Pier 55 was removed. You can see
that all the remains of Pier 54 is the
concrete deck and the arched facade. For
the next decade, it basically stays the
same with only a few instances where you
can see a tent added for special events.
Then in 2015, a cloud obscures our view
and then reveals that the pier had been
completely removed. It took only 4
months to tear it down. In 2016,
construction began in earnest, starting
with an expansion of the waterfront to
better accommodate the Hudson River
Greenway, which is an 11mi path that
runs from Battery Park at the tip of
Manhattan all the way up to the Bronx.
It's a two-way cycle track that is
incredibly busy. I should mention that
Little Island is also within Hudson
River Park, the waterfront park that
extends from Battery Park up to 59th
Street. It was formed after the elevated
Westside Highway was demolished. All of
those peers were falling into disuse,
same as Pier 54. Hudson River Park
created so much new parkland along the
waterfront and on peers that it's the
second largest park in Manhattan after
Central Park. By 2017, you can see the
walkways to Little Island taking shape.
And by 2019, the concrete structure is
under construction. The tulips were
pre-cast and shuttled down the Hudson on
ships before being embedded in the
riverbed. By April 2020, they're all in
place and the landscaping begins. And
finally, on May 21st, 2021, Little
Island opened to the public. Okay, now
that we have our history straight, let's
get into the drama. The Google Earth
view of this makes it seem like it was a
straightforward process, but it was not.
For the next part of the video, we're
going to rely on this excellent journal
article called Little Island, its big
journey through legal battles. This
article in the Journal of Urban
Regeneration and Renewal was written by
Apichia Pentan, an undergraduate
student. Getting an article published in
a peer-review journal is difficult for
anyone. So, great job, Apicha. Our
modern story begins with a billionaire.
His name is Barry Diller and while you
probably haven't heard of him, you've
heard of his resume. He founded the Fox
network with Rupert Murdoch, not Fox
News, but the broadcast TV station Fox
and green lit programs like Married with
Children and the Simpsons. He at one
point owned QVC, the Home Shopping
Network, USA Network, Tinder, College
Humor, Expedia, and more. This guy is a
modern-day media mogul, and his net
worth is north of $4 billion. Like I
said before, he's also married to
fashion designer Diane von Ferenberg,
and the two of them are somewhat of a
power couple in New York City. How did
Diller get involved in Little Island?
Well, the Diller and Von Ferenberg
Family Foundation, a philanthropic
nonprofit they run together, was the
single largest donor to the Highline.
The Highline is a 2.3 km long linear
park built at top an old elevated rail
line on the west side of Manhattan. It
is a delightful urban space, and I
highly recommend you check it out. And
if you do, be sure to stop at 23rd
Street where you'll get a familiar view.
The swooshy buildings and bike bell
intro for my channel's video were
actually taken from the Highline. So,
you get a selfie in my video's intro in
a way. Let's start calling that view the
city beautiful view. Anyway, back in
2011, the Huds River Park Trust was
trying to figure out a way to replace
Pier 54. It wasn't a vent space, but it
was also just a slab of concrete. There
was an opportunity to do something
better. Hurricane Sandy actually
irreparably damaged the pier in 2012 and
really forced the trust hand. By the
way, the Hudson River Park Trust is the
organization responsible for planning
and operating Hudson River Park. It's a
public benefit corporation formed
jointly by the state and city of New
York. Because Diller had generously
supported the Highline, the trust
reached out to him to see if he was
interested in funding a replacement and
if he had any ideas for what that
replacement could be. Diller was
intrigued and secured the services of
Heatherwick's studio. Architects known
for creative projects, including the
vessel on the other end of the Highline.
In 2014, they published their vision for
Little Island: Tulips and All. It
received a generally positive reception,
but this was also the start of the
Highline drama. First of all, some were
upset that the Hudson River Park Trust
asked a billionaire to fund and design a
new pier without any sort of public
input at all, which honestly is kind of
fair. There were also fears that this
would be a private space, not a public
one. The old Pier 54 hosted concerts and
events, and this new pier would do the
same. Barry Diller is an entertainment
mogul, so again, this concern is fair.
Despite these concerns, the project
received numerous endorsements,
including Mayor Bill Delasio and
Governor Cuomo, both of whom agreed to
kick in some money on top of the Diller
funding. With momentum on its side, the
project went into environmental review,
which seasoned planners know is the
phase where anything can happen and
things often go off the rails. For this
project, the roadblock came from the
City Club of New York, a civic advocacy
organization. They filed a series of
lawsuits aimed at stopping their project
on the grounds that the park violated
the public trust doctrine and state
environmental laws. While the lawsuit
came from the City Club, the funds for
the lawsuits came from billionaire real
estate developer Douglas Durst. His
company might be best known for
co-developing One World Trade Center in
partnership with the Port Authority.
What did Durst have against Little
Island? Well, he was once the chair of
Hudson River Park's fundraising
committee, but left due to conflicts
with other committee members. There's a
good case we made that he had a grudge
against the project. Regardless, the
court cases argued the following. The
park plan said that 49% of the tickets
for sale in the amphitheater could be
sold for market rates, which meant that
the park was not truly 100% purely
public. The large non-per-like shape
impeded the navigation of boats going to
nearby peers. Little Island would be so
tall it would impede views from the
shore. All the concrete tulips would
disturb marine life and aquatic plants.
And according to the Huds River Park
Act, any construction in the estuary
must be for water dependent uses, and
this new park did not qualify. In 2016,
a judge heard the arguments and
ultimately decided in favor of Little
Island. I won't go through all of the
reasons, but for example, the judge felt
that the 49% of tickets at market rate
would actually help fund the park,
giving that a public purpose. Durst
didn't give up and the city club sued
the Army Corps of Engineers for giving
the Hudson River Park Trust approval to
build Little Island. This caused delays
in the project, but the trust eventually
overcame them, clearing the way for
construction. Then, in a twist, Barry
Dillard decided to end his support for
the project, essentially killing it. The
lawsuit delays had made the project more
expensive as construction costs
increased during that time. Diller also
felt like the project would continue to
be a lightning rod for controversy and
not worth the future drama. Now,
fortunately, in late 2017, Governor
Cuomo offered to increase the state's
funding amount from $18 million to 50
million and convinced Mayor Delasio to
increase the city share from 17 million
to 50 million. He also negotiated with
the city club to get them to drop their
opposition. All of this appeased Diller
and the project was back on.
Construction began soon after in May
2021. Little Island opened to the
public. And let's just say that I'm not
the only person who really fell in love
with it. It's a great punctuation mark
to the Highline only a block away. And
it's another park in a relatively park
starve area of Manhattan. Upper
Manhattan has Central Park among other
parks, but lower Manhattan has a low
amount of park area per person. And the
new parks along the waterfront may be
the easiest solution to filling that
gap. Old peers around the world have
been repurposed to be entertainment,
recreation, and cultural amenities just
like the ones in New York. So many of
San Francisco have been repurposed that
what was once a working waterfront is
now a tourist district, including
Fisherman's Wararf and the
Exploratorium. It turns out that people
really like being up against the water,
even more so when there aren't active
fishing operations or warehouses in the
way. Little Island also represents
another trend, private money in public
spaces. In New York, nearly all of the
most famous parks, including Bryant Park
and Central Park, are supported by
donations from rich individuals and
corporations. There are two ways to look
at this. On the one hand, I prefer the
idea of parks that are completely
publicly funded and taxpayers have the
final say in how parks are designed and
used. The City Club of New York argument
about the New Yorkers being left out of
the outreach process makes sense to me.
On the other hand, many amazing
institutions we have today were built
with billionaire financing. Carnegie
libraries, for example, were funded by
Andrew Carnegie, a wealthy steel baron.
There was a time when many of the
wealthy elite donated money to civic
institutions, and this really isn't any
different. I'm not going to go to bat
for billionaires, but I guess if
billionaires want to spend their money,
I'd prefer to be on things like Little
Island than say like social media
companies, newspapers, or other shadier
things. In the case of Little Island, a
billionaire with some vision teamed up
with a great architect to design
something truly unique and eye-catching.
It's a public space for everyone to
enjoy. If you get a chance, go check it
out. And speaking of checking things
out, if you made it this far in the
video, maybe you'd like to check out my
next video. It's live on Nebula. It's
about the yes in God's backyard movement
to allow faith-based organizations to
build housing on their land. You can go
watch it right now. I always post my
videos early there. So, when you see a
new video of mine on YouTube, the next
one is already on Nebula. The cool thing
is that now Nebula is offering free
trials, meaning you can check out that
video in the entire massive catalog of
Nebula videos for free. There is truly
no barrier to you going, doing a quick
sign up, and watching the next video. If
you use our 3-day free trial, be sure to
check out some of my exclusive Nebulaon
videos, including my great city series.
It profiles some of the most iconic
parts of the world's most important
cities. I also produced Planning Ancient
Rome, a never-before-seen visual history
of the ancient city. It's some of my
best work because Nebula provided
additional resources and is only
available on this platform. In addition
to early access, Nebula offers a
platform that's adree. It's just the
best way to watch my videos. You can
also watch other Urbanist creators there
too. City nerd is on Nebula and so is
not just bikes, Downey Live, Stewart
Hicks, Wendover Productions, and other
great cities and transportation
channels. It's like Urbanist Central
over on Nebula, and it's the best place
to watch and support those creators and
the great work that they're doing. In
all, Nebula offers you, the viewer, an
ad-ree experience filled with videos
produced by a curated group of
thoughtful YouTubers. And those
thoughtful creators are also publishing
big budget, highquality, exclusive
content like my Great City series. You
can get all of this for a surprisingly
affordable price. And when you sign up
at my link, nebula.tv/ citybut, you'll
get 40% off an annual subscription. My
channel, you can get a portion of that
subscription fee as long as you stay
subscribed. So, it's one of the best
ways to support me and this channel.
Nebul is also offering lifetime
memberships for people who want to go
above and beyond in their support of my
channel and the platform. They normally
cost $500, but right now, for the
holidays, we're offering 40% off of
those as well. That's only 300 bucks for
unlimited Nebula for life. And if you
want to help others support City
Beautiful, Nebula now offers gift cards.
You can give someone a month, a year, or
a lifetime of Nebula. I know these are
popular gifts. I've heard it from my
subscribers. They're perfect for a last
minute holiday giving. So go start your
free trial and watch right now by
clicking on the link in the description.
Thanks.